**Textbook**: Calculus Alternate 6th Edition by Larson Hostetler & Edwards



<u>Functions</u>: A relationship between two variables such that for every value of the first there is only one corresponding value of the second.



<u>Domain</u>: All x-values that make f(x) true.



<u>Range</u>: All y-values in the domain of f(x).



##Linear Functions
$$
y = mx+b\\
\text {m is the slope}\\
m = \frac{y_2-y_1}{x_2-x_1} \text{ given } (x_1, y_1) and (x_2, y_2)\\
$$
##Systems of Linear Equations

- **Substitution Method**
  - Solve one equation for one variable in terms of the other substitute that solution into the second equation. Solve for the single variable. Plug that solution into any equation and solve for the remaining variable.
- **Addition/Elimination Method**
  - Pick a variable to eliminate. Multiply both equations by some number so that the coefficients end up as additive inverses. Add the two equations. Solve for the remaining variable. Plug back into the original equation to solve for the remaining variable.


##Quadratic Functions

- Parent function: f(x) = x^2
- General Quadratic Equation: ax^2 + bx + c = 0, a != 0


##Factoring

1. Put the equation into the general form.
2. Find two factors that multiply to and add to b. Call the factors e and f.
3. Put the equation into the form (x+ e)(x + f) = 0.


##Rules

1. If c is positive, b > 0, then both are positive.
2. if c is negative, b < 0, then both are negative.
3. ???
4. If c < 0, b < 0, then the bigger value is negative, and the smaller one is positive.


##Completing the Square

1. Divide the entire equation by a
2. Bring constants to the other side
3. add (b/2)^2 to both sides of the equation
4. Factor and solve


##Solving Quadratic Equations by Factoring

1. Put the quadratic equation in general terms
2. Factor
3. Set each factor equal to zero
4. Solve for the variable



<u>Vertex of a parabola</u>: (-b/2a, f(-b/2a))



- When writing downward range intervals
  - [] inclusive
  - () not inclusive


<u>Range</u>
$$
[f(\frac{-b}{2a}), \text{infinity}), \text{if} \ a \gt 0\\
(- \text{infinity}, f(\frac{-b}{2a})], \text{if} \ a \lt 0\\
$$
##Quadratic Formula

$$
x = \frac{-b \frac{+}{}\sqrt{b^2-4ac}}{2a}\\
b^2 -4ac\text{ is called the discriminant}\\
\text{* if the discriminant is 0, the roots and real, rational, and equal}\\
\text{* if the discriminant is positive and a perfect square, roots are real, rational, unequal}\\
\text{* if the discriminant is positive and not a perfect square, roots are real and irrational}\\
\text{* if the discriminant is negative , roots are imaginary}
$$

##Piecewise Functions

- A function defined by at least two pieces that cover different parts of the domain.


##Step Functions

- Piecewise functions containing all constants.

- $$
  f(x) = {-2 | x< 0\\2|0<x<2\brace-2|2<x}
  $$





##Rational Functions

- f(x) = M / N, where M and N are polynomials and N != 0

- **Vertical Asymptotes**

  - Set the denominator equal to 0. Solve for x. The remaining values are the domain.

- **Horizontal Asymptotes**

  1. Top Heavy Function

     - Numerator is a higher degree than the denominator.
     - No horizontal asymptote.

  2. Bottom Heavy Function

     - Denominator is a higher degree than the numerator.
     - The horizontal asymptote is the x-axis, a.k.a y = 0.

  3. If the degree of the numerator and the denominator is equal:

     - $$
       \frac{ax^P + bx + ...}{cx^P + dx + ...}\\
       \text{Horizontal asymptote: }y = \frac{a}{c}
       $$

- Holes in the graph for rational functions occur when the **same factor** is in both the numerator and the denominator.


##Transformations of Functions

1. **Translations**
   - Shift up c units
     - y = f(x) + c
   - Shift down c units
     - y = f(x) - c
   - Shifts left c units
     - y = f(x + c)
   - Shifts right c units
     - y = f(x - c)
2. **Reflections**
   - Reflection over x-axis
     - y = -f(x)
   - Reflection over y-axis
     - y = f(-x)
3. **Dilations**
   - Stretch f(x) vertically if a > 1
     - y = af(x)
   - Shrink f(x) vertically if 0 < a < 1
     - y = af(x)
   - Stretch f(x) horizontally if c > 1
     - y = f(cx)
   - Shrink f(x) horizontally if 0 < c < 1
     - y = f(cx)


##Order of Transformations

1. Parenthesis (horizontal shift)
2. Multiplication (stretch / shrink)
3. Reflections
4. Vertical Shift



*On quizzes, showing the original function and the final function graph dotted is fine.*



##Absolute Value

- Absolute value is the distance between a function and the origin. 
- Since distance is never negative, absolute value is never negative.
- Absolute value is denoted by | f(x) |.


##Absolute Value Equations

1. |f(x)| = -a

   - No Solution

   —————————

2. Move absolute value on one side, everything else on the other.

3. To remove the absolute value sign, break the function into two separate equations.

4. Solve the equations.

