## Continued Later Geography Theories

- Alexander Humboldt, cont.
  - This dude was famous for making a map of a mountain.
- **Isotherms** are lines of equal temperature, Humboldt created a world map with these.
- Humboldt influenced hella people like Thoreau, Jefferson, Bolivar, Marsh, and Darwin.

## The Globe

- The North Pole is a body of water surrounded by landmass, and The South Pole is a landmass surrounded by a body of water.


- A **great circle** is a latitude / longitude that goes through the center.
  - The Equator and all the latitudes are great circles.
- **Latitude** measures distance north / south of the Equator.
  - They are also called **parallels**.
  - 1 latitude is a constant 111 km.
- **Longitude** measures how east or west you are from the Prime Meridian.
  - Stop halfway.
  - Measures distance from anywhere because all are great circles.
  - They are also called **meridians**.
  - 1 longitude is 111 km at the equator and 0 km at the poles.
- The Earth at the Equator is 0.3% wider than it is tall. 
- The Earth rotates 15&deg; per hour so time zones differ by 1 hour.
  - 360&deg; / 15&deg; = 24

## Degrees, Minutes, and Seconds

- DDD&deg; MM' SS.S''
- This is the most common format used to mark maps.
  - 60 seconds in a minute (60'' = 1')
  - 60 minutes in a degree (60' = 1&deg;)

## UTM

- The UTM system also uses a grid system to break the Earth up into 1200 quadrilaterals.
- The military / GPS uses UTM.

## Globe Projections

- Polar Projection
  - Meridians are radiating straight lines.
  - Parallels are concentric circles.
  - Scale fraction increases outward from the pole.
- Cylindrical Projection
  - Cylindrical projections usually oriented so the equator forms the standard parallel.
  - Low latitudes are displayed the most accurately.
- Robinson Projection
- Goode Projection
  - This is the most accurate projection, but gives up being a single map.