## Smog

- Mixture of ozone and bad stuff.
- Smog blocks insolation.

## Haze

- Aerosols hold moisture in the air, causing fog-like stuff.
- Haze also blocks insolation.
- This can be irritating to your eyes.

## Fallout / Dry Deposition

- Air spreading of gases, particles, and aerosols.

## Washout / Wet Deposition

- This is also known as acid rain.
- The water that comes down from the air is dissolving the aerosols and stuff in the air, absorbing them, making the water acidic.

## Lake Acidification

- Acid rain spilling into lakes.

------

##Wind

- Wind is caused by unequal heating of the air in the atmosphere.
- Wind goes from warm &rarr; cold.
- This creates a pressure gradient.
- Winds are relatively horizontal, minus updrafts.
- We characterize them with direction, and speed.
- **Pressure Gradient**: Differences in air pressure.
  - The pressure gradient forces acts at right angle sot the isobars (90 degrees).

## Monsoons

- In July the position of the ITCZ moves North.
- Low pressure over the land causes winds to flow off the ocean.
- This brings heavy rainfall.

## Rossby Waves

- Smooth westward flow of upper air westerlies develop at the polar front, and form convoluted waves, eventually pinch off primary mechanism for poleward heat transfer. Pools of cool air create areas of low pressure.

## Upwelling

- Where cold water rises from deep ocean areas and:
- where the Coriolis forces prompts ocean currents to diverge from coastlines.

## Air Masses

- c = continental (dry)
- m = maritime (wet)
- T = tropical (warm)
- P = polar (cold)
- A = Arctic (cold) (from Arctic oceans and fringing lands)

##Cold Fronts

- At a cold front, a cold air mass lifts a warm air mass aloft.
- The upward motion sets off a line of thunderstorms.

## Warm Fronts

- In a warm front, warm air advances toward cold air and rises up and over the cold air.

| Front         | Warm  | Cold  |
| ------------- | ----- | ----- |
| Speed         | Slow  | Fast  |
| Rain Duration | Long  | Short |
| Rain Amount   | Light | Heavy |

