## Biogeography

- Ecology is the study of the interaction between life forms and their environment.
- Food web is better than food chain.
  - In an ecosystem, you have a living community where the different species are interdependent upon each other.
  - Plants are biomass, they are most of the ecosystem's food.
  - Detritivores decompose things.
  - Herbivores eat plants, and carnivores eat other animals, and omnivores eat both.
- Marine Food Chain
  - Algae are plants.
  - Plankton eat algae, and planktivorous fish eat plankton, which are eaten by larger fish.
  - Benthic fish are at the bottom of the ocean, and eat whatever that falls or is left over.

## Exam

- Four parts.
- First part will have pictures.
  - There will be a question on the paper, and you will fill it in on the paper. The picture will be a prompt, to help you think about the issue.
- The second part is based on stuff we talked about at the beginning of the semester, including the game.
  - Correlation, causation
  - The game
  - What makes for good science
  - Induction, deduction
- The third section is short answers.
  - Stuff from latitude and longitude stuff
  - Stuff from winds
  - Up to chapter 5
  - Some require a word, some require a sentence and an explanation
- The last part is a vocabulary test
  - It's in the form of a crossword puzzle
  - Go back through notes, or end of each chapter in book
  - Make sure you know what each word means or what they're for
  - a
    1. Look for explanations for things
    2. Go back to the slides or to the external links on blackboard
- You may bring one page of handwritten notes, and you can write on both sides
- Use it to remind you of stuff, like how does stuff work, why does stuff work, definitions