##Earth and History

- The Earth is about 4.5 billion years old, and its broken up into Ages, Epochs, Periods, and Eras.
- Crust == lithosphere
  - Studying movement of the lithosphere is tectonics
  - Oceanic crust is younger and denser than continental crust
- Lower mantle = asthenosphere



##Ocean

- Continental shelf is underwater, and part of country territory.
- Natural disasters can still happen underwater.
- Biggest? part of Earth's ocean is 2-3 miles, 30% of the ocean's area?
- In addition, there are these very big trenches.
  - Deepest one is the Marianas Trench.
  - Stuff is alive in those trenches, spooky
  - They live off methane and stuff, using chemosynthesis.
  - They live without light.
  - There's water hot enough to boil us alive.
  - After 1000 feet, there can be no photosynthesis.
  - It takes 2.5 hours to reach the bottom.
  - 6 foot long tubeworms living on a 40 foot long pillar.
  - They thrived on the hottest water, some starved to death.
- Alfred Wegner, born in 1880, and received his pHD in Astronomy, was curious about tons of stuff, he was doin shit in the library, and noticed same fossils appear on different continents, but they couldn't walk around, but there was a puzzle, and he discovered Pangaea.
- His theory was continental drift, people didn't like it, because they thought he was crazy, and he wasn't even a geologist.
- Eventually, people never found a better idea, and in the 60s studies of plate tectonics showed that plates moved, not the continents, but he had the instinct right, good first try tbh.