## Probability and Stats

- Population: A set of all conceivably possible and hypothetically possible outcomes.
- Sample: A subset of a population census survey.

## Measures of Central Tendency

- Mean: average

  - population

    - $\mu = \frac{\sum_{i = 1}^{N} {x_i} }{{N}} = \frac{x_1 + ... + x_N}{N}$

    - $x_i$ = data points = $\{x_i, ... , x_N \}$
    - $N$ = # of data points in the population

  - Example

    - The average salary for 3 nba players is $3,650,000. Is it possible to have:
      - one player of the three making $6, 000, 000?
      - two of the three players making $6, 000, 000 each?
      - $\overline{x}$ = 3,6500,000 = $\frac{\sum{x_i}}{3} * 3$
      - $\{x_1, x_2, x_3\}$
      - $x_i$ = nba player salary
    - *reliable and unique

- Weighted Mean: The weighted mean $\overline{x}_w$ is the mean of a set of data points $x_1, ..., x_n$ which have a relative importance expressed on them $w_1, ..., w_n$.

  - $\bar{x}_w = \frac{{\sum_{i= 1}^{n}{x_iw_i}}}{n} = \frac{x_1w_1 + ... + x_n w_n}{w_1 + ... + w_n}$

  - Example:
  - A student scores a 20, 65, 80 on the three exams has a homework grade of 90, a final grade of 80, what is the class average?
  - Since the hwk grade is 90, the 20 gets dropped.
  - 65 - 30%
  - 80 - 30%
  - 90 - 10%
  - 80 - 30%
  - = 76.5 final grade

- Median: Middle number in an ordered set of numbers
  - If n is odd, the median is $x_{\frac{n+1}{2}}$
  - ex: 6, 9, 3, 1, 7 &rarr; 1, 3, 6, 7, 9 = 6
  - If n is even, the median is the mean of the middle two points in the data set
  - $x_{\frac{n}{2}}, x_{(\frac{n}{2}+1)}$
  - ex: 2, 7, 11, 15, 19, 27 &rarr; ${\frac{11 + 15}{2} = 13}$

- Box Plot

  1. Median &rarr; $Q_2$

  2. Quartiles &rarr; $Q_1$: The median of the first half of the data set

     	​		    $Q_3$: The median of the second half of the data set

  3. Outliers - Points that lie far outside of the majority of the data set

     - Box Plot:
       - smallest outlier
       - $Q_1$
       - median $Q_2$
       - $Q_3$
       - largest outlier
     - Median is unique
     - Interquartile Range (IQR): $Q_3 - Q_1$

- Mode: The number that shows up more than once, and shows up the most.
  1. doesn't exist
  2. unique
  3. more than one mode