##  Probability

-  <u>Sample Space:</u>
  - The set of all possible outcomes
  - An even is a subset of the sample space
- <u>Complementary (Compliment)</u>
  - The compliment of an event $A$ is $\bar{A}$ or $A'$ (stands for not A).
  - ex. Roll a die, let A be the event an even number shows up
    - $\bar{A} = \{1, 3, 5\}$
- <u>Mutually exclusive</u>
  - Events that share no thing in common
  - <u>Union:</u> $\cup$ = or (addition)
  - <u>Intersection:</u> $\cap$ = and (multiplication)  
- <u>Venn Diagrams</u>
  - A + B = sample space
  - A $\cup$ B = A or B, both filled
  - A $\cap$ B = intersection of A and B, only middle filled
  - No intersection of A and B = mutual exclusion 

- <u>Addition Rule</u>
  - General: $P (A \cup B ) = P(A) + P(B) - P(A \cap B)$
  - Mutually Exclusive: $P(A \cup B) = P(A) + P(B)$
- <u>Marginal Probability</u>
  - The probability that an even occurs given no conditions.
    - $P(\text{heads})$
- <u>Conditional Probability</u>
  - The probability that an even happens given another event already happened.
    - $P(A | B) = \text{probability A given B}$
    - $P(A | B) = \frac{P(A \cap B)}{P(B)}$

- <u>Multiplication Rule</u>
  - General: $P(A \cap B) = P(A | B) * P(B)$
  - Independent: $P (A \cap B) = P(A) * P(B)$
- <u>Independent Events</u>
  - One event has no bearing on the outcome of the other.
  - $P(A|B) = P(A)$
  - ex. on two flips of a coin:
    - $P(\text{second heads} | \text{first heads}) = \frac{1}{2}$
- ex. A survey was given to students and faculty asking for their position on a change of policy.

|         | Favor | Oppose | Neutral | Total |
| ------- | ----- | ------ | ------- | ----- |
| Faculty | 45    | 15     | 10      | 70    |
| Student | 90    | 110    | 30      | 230   |
| Total   | 135   | 125    | 40      | 300   |

1. $P(\text{faculty} \cup \text{favor})$

   General addition rule

   $=P(\text{factor}) + P(\text{favor}) - P(\text{faculty} \cap \text{favor})$

   $= \frac{70}{300} + \frac{135}{300} - \frac{45}{300} = \frac{160}{300}$

2. $P(faculty | oppose)$

   conditional probability

   $= \frac{P(\text{faculty} \cap \text{oppose})}{P(\text{oppose})}$

   $=\frac{15 / 500}{125 /300}$

3. $P(student)$

   marginal probability

   $= \frac{230}{300}$

4. $P(neutral | faculty)$

   conditional probability

   $= \frac{10 /300}{70 /300} = \frac{10}{70}$

- In a group of 2500 people, 1400 are female, 600 are vegetarian, and 400 are female and vegetarian. What is the probability that a random person selected from this group is male and a vegetarian?

  $P (\text{male} \cup \text{vegetarian}) = P(\text{male}) + P(\text{vegetarian}) - P(\text{male} \cap \text{vegetarian})$

  $= \frac{1100}{2500} + \frac{600}{2500} - \frac{200}{2500} = \frac{1500}{2500}$

