##Resources

- 100 million years ago (Pangaea)
  - Asia (Gold, Uranium)
  - Africa (Gold, Diamonds)
  - North America (Gold, Silver, Lumber)
  - South America (Gold, Diamonds)
  - Australia (Gold, Diamonds, Agriculture)
  - Europe (Gold, Copper)
  - Antartica (Natural Gas)
  - &uarr; **Human Migration**

## Market Types

- 1200 - 1650

  - Capitalism
  - Tried and failed many times in Europe

- 1650 - 1850 - Present

  - Capitalism
    1. England
    2. Netherlands (Dutch)
    3. Germany
    4. France
    5. Italy

- Almost 400 years later, according to <u>OXFAM</u> data, here are the results of what Markets / Capitalism has produced:

  1. Population of 7.5 billion

  2. 115 billion dead

  3. 2008        -        2016

     1800 MB - 2400 MB 

     (MB = multi billionaires) 

     (Combined wealth is well into 200 trillion)

  4. |——|——————|

       2 = your pay      8 hour worlday

  5. 1.5 billion women make less than $2 a day

  6. Woman make 78 cents for every dollar men make.

  7. 1972  $342 / week

     2015 $295 / week



- England was the first actual capitalist country.
- Oxfam has collected tons of data about Earth, and it's a very good resource.

## Definitions

- **Economics** is concerned with our day to day <u>work</u> activities, and what happens to the things that we make.
  - Work is making tangible things.
- **Economics** is the study of the <u>efficient</u> distribution of scarce resources in order to get the things that we want.
  - This definition of economics is under capitalism.
  - Efficient means to get the most by using up the least.


- **Barter**: The exchange of goods without any money.
  - The fancy name for this is **coincidence of want**.
  - This system is highly possible to have money introduced into.

- The three basic resources and land, labor, and capital.

- A **need** is something you cannot do without.

- A **want** is something you can do without.

- **Microeconomics** is the study of the behavior of a <u>single</u> consumer or a <u>single</u> business; the study of the two smallest units in capitalism.

  - This is assuming the single business/consumer behaves rationally.
  - This means they want to get the most value for their dollar.

- **Macroeconomics** is the study of the aggregate economy.

  - Aggregate means whole.

  Macroeconomics also means the study of the relationships among the three major subgroups:

  1. The consumer groups
  2. The business groups
  3. The government groups
     - Federal
     - State
     - Local

  Macroeconomics is also the study of what causes inflation and unemployment.

  - Inflation is rising prices.