# Exam Review

6. What do economists do and what are the tools they use?

   - The first tool they use is **descriptive economics**. It means collecting facts and data.
   - The second tool they use is **inductive reasoning**. They take data and draw conclusions.
   - The third tool they use is **deductive reasoning**. They test their conclusions.
   - **Positive Economics**: Deals with the facts.
   - **Normative economics**: Why are the facts the way they are?
   - **Abstraction**: Simple way of looking at something that is more complicated.

7. **Bequest** is just another word for inheritance; a way of maintaining the status quo, leaving money with money.

8. **Closed economies** are countries that don't have trade partners.

   - There are no more closed economies today; all of the countries today have trade partners.
   - This is a theoretical concept.

   **Open economies** are countries that have trade partners.

9. -

10. Main groups in a capitalist economy:

  - Poor
    - < 13k income
    - H.S. or less
  - Middle Class
    - 45k - 99k
    - B.A. - M.A.
    - Nurses, Teachers
  - Upper Class
    - \> 100k
    - Professionals Athletes, Other Professionals

  1. Workers (99%)
  2. Capitalists (1%)
     - Industrialists
     - Financialists
     - Land owners
  3. The media income is from 52k - 59k.

11. The **economic problem** has three questions: what, how, and for whom?

    - Anything that is profitable will be produced.
    - -
    - -

12. Circular Flow Diagram of Goods and Services

```sequence
Household->Business:Sell Labor Resouces
Business->Household:Pay Wages / Salaries
Note right of Business:Top Resource Market
Note over Business, Household:Self Interest\nInvisible Hand\n \nCompetition\nSpecialization\nMass Production
Note right of Business:Bottom Product Market
Business->Household:Sell Goods / Services
Household->Business:Pay for Goods / Services
```

13. -
14. **4 Different Economies** and **Main Features**
    1. Pure Market Economy
       - Private ownership
       - Buy / sell markets
    2. Command
       - Public ownership
       - Government plan
       - Exact opposite of PME
    3. Mixed
       - Some of each from above two
    4. Traditional
       - Ruled by custom
15. **Comparative advantage** is the idea that one country has the advantage over another in doing something. This also applies to individuals or regions. **Creative destruction** is a new product that replaces an old product. Destroys the infrastructure of the old product (new factories, etc).