## Relations

- Interest Rates and Saving
  - As interest rates go up, savings go up.
- Interest Rates and Borrowing $ to Invest (BI)
  - As interest rate go up, BI goes down.
- *Some (not all) economists believe that people save and borrow $ to invest for different reasons.*

## Neo-Classical and Keynesian Views of Interest Rates

- The Interest Rate (I) is what it costs to borrow money (it is **the price of money**). When someone borrows money from a bank, they pay a price which is the interest rate.
- People use banks to save and borrow money.
- <u>For the Neo-Classical View Interest Rates are Very Important</u>
  1. People save money and borrow money to invest from banks which charge a rate of interest.
  2. When the rate of interest is high, people will save more and borrow less; when it is low, people will save less and borrow more.
  3. For example, across the whole economy, if everybody together saves 5 billion when the rate of interest is 5% (then 5 billion worth of things that were made won't be bought, right?); not true, because it is assumed that investors will borrow exactly 5 billion @ 5% to invest and/or to buy exactly all those things that weren't bought before.
- <u>For the Keynesian View Interest Rates are Seen Differently</u>
  1. People SAVE and borrow money o INVEST for <u>different reasons</u> none of which have anything to do with interest rates.
  2. People borrow money to invest based on how much profit they think they will make, not based on interest rates.
  3. People save money for reasons that have nothing to do with interest rates; they save for three reasons: one, precautionary reasons, two, speculative reasons, and three, they save out of habit.

## The Business or Economic Cycle

- Long term cycle (25-50 years)
- Short term cycle (4-8 years)
- Peak (Only voluntary unemployment: FU & SU and Inflation)
- Trough or Bottom (Cyclical Unemployment and lower prices)
- Expansion (Rising output or GDP and rising prices)
- Recession (Falling output or GDP and lower prices)
- The Arrow (shows the trend that GDP rises over time even though it rises and falls)