#Chapter 7: Utility Maximization

## Law of Diminishing Marginal Utility

- As consumption of a good or service increases, the marginal utility obtained from each additional unit of a good or service decreases.
- Explains downward sloping demand curves.

## Total Utility and Marginal Utility

- Utility is one unit of satisfaction or pleasure.
- **Total utility** is the total amount of satisfaction.
- **Marginal utility** is the extra satisfaction from an additional unit of the good.
- $\text{MU} = \triangle$

## Theory of Consumer Behavior

- **Rational behavior**
  - Preferences
- **Budget constraint**
  - Prices

## Utility Maximizing Rule

- **Consumer equilibrium**

  - Consumer allocates his or her income so that the last dollar spent on each product yields the same amount of extra (marginal) utility.

  - Algebraically,

    $\frac{\text{MU of product A}}{\text{Price of A}} = \frac{\text{MU of product B}}{\text{Price of B}}$

## Applications and Extensions

- New products
- iPad
- Diamond-water paradox
  - Greater abundance of water in the world than diamonds.
  - Because we consume so little diamonds, we prize the diamonds at a higher rate.
  - The marginal utility of diamond is higher than its total utility, but vice versa for water.
- Opportunity cost and time
  - We're using the opportunity cost of making money right now to go to college instead, that is the cost.
- Medical care purchases
- Cash and non-cash gifts

#Chapter 8: Behavioral Economics

- Focusing on the mental processes behind decisions. 
- Improving outcomes by improving decision making.
- Viewing behavioral economics and neoclassical economics as complements.
  - Neoclassical economics at the supermarket
  - Behavioral economics at the supermarket
  - Complementary explanations at the supermarket.
- **Heuristics** are energy savers
  - Riding a bicycle with steering heuristics
  - Guesstimating ranks with recognition heuristics
  - The implications of hardwired heuristics