##Past 2000 Years

- Genetic studies show our earliest modern human ancestors arose in East Africa about 200,000 years ago, migrating via Arabia and Palestine to Europe, South Asia, and Australia by 50,000 B.C, North Asia by 20,000 B.C, and finally the Americas by 15,000 B.C.
- By 1000 B.C (= King David), the total population on Earth was 50 million.
- By the early first century AD (Jesus), it reached 300 million.
- 1500 (Columbus) = 500 million
- 1804 (Napoleon) = 1 billion
- 1927 (Babe Ruth) = 2 billion



## Past 90 Years

- Since then, it has more than tripled.
- By 2050, it will likely peak at about 9-11 billion people.

 

## The Top Languages on Earth

- The 7 billion people on Earth speak 7,000 languages; most have just a few thousand speakers at most, and today are quickly disappearing.
- The four most widely-spoken are:
  - Mandarin Chinese (850 million)
  - Spanish (329 million)
  - English (328 million)
  - Arabic (221 million)
- The next 5 languages
  - Hindi (182 million)
  - Bengali (181 million)
  - Portugese (178 million)
  - Russian (144 million)
  - Japanese (122 million)
- The greatest language variation is in Africa, India, and esp. New Guinea. The normal tendency of language to multiply is limited by worldwide global communication and commerce.



## Religious Identification

- If the human race were a pizza, it would be divided as follows:
  - Judaism (0.2%)
  - Christianity (33%)
  - Islam (23%)
  - Hinduism (14%)
  - Buddhism (7%)
  - Atheist (11%)
  - All Others (11%)



## Religion 

- Religion; <*religio* (L) "to bind"
- Cicero (106-43 BC): Roman speaker, soldier, statesman, and philosopher.
- *Nothing is more noble, nothing more venerable than fidelity, faithfulness and truth are the most sacred excellences and endowments of the human mind.* -Cicero
- What binds us all at the highest level, bringing out the best in us?



##Working Definition of Religion

- "Family": Key arena for learning how human intimacy works, binding past, present, and future generations of ancestors with descendants.
- "Religion": Group effort to:
  1. Explain strange experiences
  2. Identify our ultimate origin & goal
  3. Cope with uncontrollable events
  4. Form groups beyond family
  5. Find meaning beyond our death
- Binding force of group identity forged by shared goals, stories, sacrifice, and imitation builds trust, confidence, and gives enduring meaning to our lives.



## Religion and Theology

- **Theology**: Broad, universal effort to think, act, and talk clearly about divinity (otherworldly, superhuman, immortal reality) in human terms invites personification, projection, idealization.
- Encounters between humanity and divinity are unbalanced. They require special handling, agents, strategies.
- Priest, Sacrifice, Prophets, Storytelling, Repetition, Imitation.



## Abraham and Covenant

- Genesis tells Abram's family story, starting from Ur. in Southern Iraq.
- His father's trek to Canaan stops in Haran, in northeastern Syria.
- Here Abram first meets **El Shaddai**, a divinity widely connected with rain, clouds, storms, thunder, mountaintops and fertility, who promises him offspring in return for exclusive loyalty.
  - **Henotheism**: Exclusive loyalty; only one god matters.
  - Abraham is offered:
    - Unending offspring
    - Promised Land (Canaan)
    - Protection, Prosperity, Peace (Shalom)
    - He becomes a Habiru, person who is blamed for everyone's issues, but he will be protected from harm.