## Did Jesus Ever Exist?

- From early on, many Christians, out of reverence for Jesus, idealized him so much they reduced any trace of human weakness. Some, called "Docetists," said Jesus never was born, had a body, or died. Mainstream Christianity has rejected this view repeatedly, but it still reoccurs.
- In the 18th-19th century, several scholarly writers, driven by historical skepticism and knowledge about religious myths from around the world, proposed Jesus  never existed as we know him. Rather, he was mainly an idea, a mix of people's hopes and dreams, esp. Israel, invented to cope with misery in their lives. If he ever existed, he was just a simple religious teacher, healer, and wise man whose followers idealized him beyond recognition.
- By the early 20th century, some scholars (eg., Arthur Drews and William Smith) argued "Jesus" was just an idea, created by fervent Jews to win Gentile Greeks to the Jewish way of life. More recently, K. Humphreys claims "Jesus" was invented by the Romans to pacify the rebellious Jews.

## Weighing Truth Claims / The Issue of Certainty

- Few things in life are fully certain, or totally impossible. Most range from probable to improbable.
- Their impact on our life and ability to imagine alternatives, affects our readiness to treat them as reliable. In short when we say "believe" something, how willing are we to act on it? What moves us from abstraction to real action?
- The Thousand Dollar Question

## Jesus of Nazareth: A Profile

- Non Christian Evidence
  - Roman
    - Tacitus
      - Annals (of Rome) (110 AD)
    - Suetonius
      - Lives of the Caesars (125 AD)
    - Pliny the Younger
      - Letter to Trajan (110 AD)
  - Jewish
    - Dead Sea Scrolls (150BC - 70AD)
    - Josephus (93 AD)
      - The Jewish War
      - Antiquities of the Jews
    - Rabbinic Writings (50 - 500 AD)
- Christian Evidence
  - ???